title: Sync Node with Network
When a node first starts, it will need to sync with the network. This process can take a while as the node is loading up the current ledger and catching up to the rest of the network. See the section below a [Fast Catchup](#sync-node-network-using-fast-catchup) option. The status can be checked by running the following goal command:

``` 
goal node status
``` 

The goal node status command will return information about the node and what block number it is currently processing. When the node is caught up with the rest of the network, the "Sync Time" will be 0.0 as in the example response below (if on MainNet, some details will be different).

<pre>
``` 
Last committed block: 125064
Time since last block: 3.1s
Sync Time: 0.0s
Last consensus protocol: https://github.com/algorandfoundation/specs/tree/5615adc36bad610c7f165fa2967f4ecfa75125f0
Next consensus protocol: https://github.com/algorandfoundation/specs/tree/5615adc36bad610c7f165fa2967f4ecfa75125f0
Round for next consensus protocol: 125065
Next consensus protocol supported: true
Genesis ID: testnet-v1.0
Genesis hash: SGO1GKSzyE7IEPItTxCByw9x8FmnrCDexi9/cOUJOiI=
``` 
</pre>

### Sync Node Network using Fast Catchup

Fast Catchup is a new feature and will rapidly update a node using catchpoint  snapshots. A new command on goal node is now available for catchup. The entire process should sync a node in minutes rather than hours or days. As an example, the results for a BetaNet fast catchup, at the time of writing this, was a couple minutes to get to the sync point and a few more minutes to sync the remaining blocks since the snapshot. The total blocks synced was around 4.2 million blocks and it finished syncing in under 6 minutes. Actual sync times may vary depending on the number of accounts, number of blocks and the network.  Here are the links to get the most recent catchup point snapshot per network. The results  include a round to catchup to and the provided catchpoint. Paste into the `goal node catchup` command.

BetaNet
https://algorand-catchpoints.s3.us-east-2.amazonaws.com/channel/betanet/latest.catchpoint

TestNet
https://algorand-catchpoints.s3.us-east-2.amazonaws.com/channel/testnet/latest.catchpoint

MainNet
https://algorand-catchpoints.s3.us-east-2.amazonaws.com/channel/mainnet/latest.catchpoint

The results will look similar to this:
`4420000#Q7T2RRTDIRTYESIXKAAFJYFQWG4A3WRA3JIUZVCJ3F4AQ2G2HZRA`

!!! warning
    Do **NOT** use fast catchup on an *archival* or relay node. If you ever do it, you need to reset your node and start from scratch.

!!! warning
    Fast catchup requires trust in the entity providing the catchpoint. An attacker controlling enough relays and proposing a malicious catchpoint can in theory allow a node to sync to an incorrect state of the blockchain. For full decentralization and no trust requirement, either use a catchpoint generated by one of your archival node (you can read the catchpoint using `goal node status`) or catch up from scratch without fast catchup.

Steps:

1) Start the node, if not started already, and run a status.

`goal node start`

`goal node status`

Results should look something like this...

``` 
Last committed block: 308
Time since last block: 0.0s
Sync Time: 6.5s
Last consensus protocol: https://github.com/algorand/spec/tree/a26ed78ed8f834e2b9ccb6eb7d3ee9f629a6e622
Next consensus protocol: https://github.com/algorand/spec/tree/a26ed78ed8f834e2b9ccb6eb7d3ee9f629a6e622
Round for next consensus protocol: 309
Next consensus protocol supported: true
Last Catchpoint:
Genesis ID: betanet-v1.0
Genesis hash: mFgazF+2uRS1tMiL9dsj01hJGySEmPN28B/TjjvpVW0=
``` 

2) Use the sync point captured above and paste into the catchup option

`goal node catchup 4420000#Q7T2RRTDIRTYESIXKAAFJYFQWG4A3WRA3JIUZVCJ3F4AQ2G2HZRA`

3) Run another status and results should look something like this showing a Catchpoint status:
`goal node status`

Results should show 5 Catchpoint status lines for Catchpoint, total accounts, accounts processed, total blocks , downloaded blocks.

<pre>
``` 
Last committed block: 4453
Sync Time: 15.8s
Catchpoint: 4420000#Q7T2RRTDIRTYESIXKAAFJYFQWG4A3WRA3JIUZVCJ3F4AQ2G2HZRA
Catchpoint total accounts: 1146
Catchpoint accounts processed: 1146
Catchpoint total blocks: 1000
Catchpoint downloaded blocks: 81
Genesis ID: betanet-v1.0
Genesis hash: mFgazF+2uRS1tMiL9dsj01hJGySEmPN28B/TjjvpVW0=
``` 
</pre>

!!! Note
Only the first 3 status (`Catchpoint`, `total accounts`, `accounts processed`) will show right after catchup begins. Status on `total blocks` and `downloaded blocks` will only show after catchup processes the total number of accounts, which takes several minutes.

4) A new option can facilitate a status watch, -w which takes a parameter of time, in milliseconds, between two successive status updates. This will eliminate the need to repeatedly issue a status manually. Press ^c to exit the watch.

`goal node status -w 1000`

5) Notice that the 5 Catchpoint status lines will disappear when completed, and then only a few more minutes are needed to sync from that point to the current block.

Once there is a Sync Time of 0, the node is synced and if fully usable.

<pre>
``` 
Last committed block: 4431453
Time since last block: 3.9s
Sync Time: 0.0s
Last consensus protocol: https://github.com/algorandfoundation/specs/tree/e5f565421d720c6f75cdd186f7098495caf9101f
Next consensus protocol: https://github.com/algorandfoundation/specs/tree/e5f565421d720c6f75cdd186f7098495caf9101f
Round for next consensus protocol: 4431454
Next consensus protocol supported: true
Last Catchpoint: 4430000#UAQPNY32LP3K5ARGFUQEFTBGELI5ZAQOMBGE7YL5ZFXL2MXWTO2A
Genesis ID: betanet-v1.0
Genesis hash: mFgazF+2uRS1tMiL9dsj01hJGySEmPN28B/TjjvpVW0=
``` 
</pre>

### Troubleshooting for fast catchup

If fast catchup fails, check the following:

- the node is *not* archival (and is not a relay).
- the software is up-to-date: `goal version -v` should report the latest `Algorand` version in https://github.com/algorand/go-algorand/releases, ignoring the `Algorand BetaNet` releases.
- the catch point matches the network used by the node and reported as `Genesis ID` by `goal node status`.
- the hardware requirements above are satisfied, in particular a not-too-slow SSD is used.
- the computer does not run out of memory.

If you used fast catchup on an archival node, you need to stop the node, remove all files in the data folder except the configuration files (`*.json`) and the genesis files (`genesis*`), and restart the node. This operation will also remove all keys stored in the node. Proceed with caution.